The Project Gutenberg eBook of Chambers's Journal of Popular Literature,
Science, and Art, Fifth Series, No. 36, Vol. I, September 6, 1884, by
Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Chambers's Journal of Popular Literature, Science, and Art,
       Fifth Series, No. 36, Vol. I, September 6, 1884

Author: Various

Release Date: August 30, 2021 [eBook #66175]

Language: English


Produced by: Susan Skinner, Eric Hutton and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The Internet
             Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHAMBERS'S JOURNAL OF POPULAR
LITERATURE, SCIENCE, AND ART, FIFTH SERIES, NO. 36, VOL. I, SEPTEMBER 6,
1884 ***




[Illustration:

CHAMBERS’S JOURNAL

OF

POPULAR

LITERATURE, SCIENCE, AND ART

Fifth Series

ESTABLISHED BY WILLIAM AND ROBERT CHAMBERS, 1832

CONDUCTED BY R. CHAMBERS (SECUNDUS)

NO. 36.—VOL. I.      SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 6, 1884.      PRICE 1½_d._]




‘GRAND DAY.’


To the majority of people, the surroundings of the legal profession,
to say nothing of the law itself, are subjects fraught with no
inconsiderable amount of the mysterious. For instance, what a variety
of conceptions have been formed by the uninitiated with respect to
one ceremony alone connected with the ‘upper branch’ of the legal
profession; we mean that known as ‘Call to the Bar.’ The very
expression itself has often proved a puzzle to the lay outsider, and
perhaps not unnaturally, because there can be no doubt that it is
one of those out-of-the-way phrases the signification of which sets
anything like mere conjecture on that point at defiance. There is a
hazy notion abroad that ‘Call to the Bar’ involves proceedings of a
somewhat imposing character, especially as there is just a smack of the
grandiloquent about the term. Accordingly, it may be disappointing to
many persons to learn that, in the first place, there is no ‘calling’
at all connected with the ceremony, except the calling over the names
of the gentlemen who present themselves for admission to the profession
known as the Bar. And in the next place, it may be a little surprising
to learn that there is no semblance even of a ‘bar’ of any description
employed in the performance of the ceremony alluded to.

Again, people appear to have a somewhat indistinct notion about legal
festivities, the traditional fun of a circuit mess, the precise share
which ‘eating dinners’ has in qualifying a student for the Bar, and
so forth. Often, too, they wonder how it is that men addicted to such
grave pursuits as those followed by the working members of the Bar, are
so much given to mirth and jollity and costly festivity. The answer to
this is that, just in proportion to the mental tension superinduced
by the demands of their calling, is the recoil of their minds in an
exactly opposite direction after that tension.

Well, then, assuming that barristers are not only a learned and
laborious but also at suitable times a convivial body of men, we will
endeavour to describe the proceedings in the Hall of an Inn of Court
on the evening of a day when barristerial conviviality is supposed to
reach its culminating point—namely, on what is termed ‘Grand Day.’

We may observe that during each of the four legal terms or sittings
there is one Grand Day, but the Grand Day of Trinity Term is the
grandest of them all, and is accordingly styled ‘Great Grand Day.’
Also, that these days are observed in each of the four Inns of
Court—namely, the Inner and Middle Temple, Lincoln’s Inn, and Gray’s
Inn. For present purposes, however, we shall suppose our Grand Day to
be in Trinity Term, and at an Inn which we shall for certain proper
reasons call Mansfield’s Inn.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is a glorious summer evening, and as we approach our noble old
Hall, we soon perceive that something ‘out of the common’ is going on.
There is the crimson cloth laid down for the noble and distinguished
guests who are always invited on these occasions; and near the entrance
there is a little knot of spectators of all kinds, from the elderly
respectable gentleman down to the shoeless ‘arab’ from the streets.
The carriages are beginning to arrive; and the sooner we are inside
the Hall the better. But there is something to be done before we get
thither. We must first enter one of the anterooms. Here there is a
great crush owing to the invariable preliminary to every dinner in
Hall—the ‘robing,’ as it is called; for benchers, barristers, and
students all dine in gowns. There are two men now busily engaged
at this work of robing, selecting from a great black mountain of
gown-stuff the attire suited to each member. On they go, asking all
the time the question, ‘Barrister or student, sir?’ of those with
whom they are unacquainted, until the last man is served. But who is
that portly looking personage, wearing a gorgeous scarlet gown, who
ever and anon appears on the scene and gives directions? Nonsense!
Did you say the head-porter? Certainly; and he is so called, after
the _lucus a non lucendo_ fashion, because he is never employed to
carry anything except perhaps letters and messages. In like manner the
women called ‘laundresses’ who attend to the chambers in the Inns of
Court, are so termed because they never wash anything at all, which in
some instances is but too painfully true. But the ‘head-porter’ _is_
carrying something this evening, in the shape of an enormous baton with
a silver knob big enough to produce five pounds-worth of shillings.
Then there is another important-looking gentleman, of graver and more
anxious demeanour, wearing a black gown, who seems to be the life and
soul of the preparations generally, and who moves about with such
alacrity as to suggest an approach to the ubiquitous. This individual
is the head-butler, and of course his position is one of serious
responsibility, especially on the present occasion.

Being now robed, we enter the Hall. What a babel of tongues is here
also! ‘Have you got a mess?’ is the question asked by friend of friend.
(An Inn of Court mess consists of four persons, the first of whom
is called the ‘Captain.’) ‘Come and join our mess,’ says another.
‘I have a capital place up here,’ shouts a joyous young student.
‘Oh, but you’ll be turned down,’ replies his friend, with a slightly
consequential air; and we see that the latter, by his sleeved and
otherwise more flowing robe, is a barrister, although as juvenile as
his hopeful friend; hence the tone of importance.

‘We sit by seniority on Grand Day,’ our learned young friend goes on to
state, and languidly falls into a seat.

‘When were you called, sir?’ says a voice to the languid but
consequential one. The voice proceeds from a form which might easily be
that of the other’s father, if not grandfather; but the question is put
_pro formâ_.

‘Hilary ’78’ is the answer.

‘Then I fear I must trouble you to move, for I was called in Hilary
’58, ha, ha, ha!’ in which the students previously corrected heartily
join.

‘Oh, all right,’ with a slight _soupçon_ of deference; and away go the
youngsters; while the man called to the Bar in 1858 will very likely
have to make way for another called in ’48, and so on, until the whole
are duly and severally located.

There is an unquestionable aspect of distinction about the place this
evening. The old Hall itself, in the centre of which is displayed the
costly plate of Mansfield’s Inn, seems to smile in the sunshine of the
summer evening. Yet, as the light softly steals in through the stained
glass forming the armorial bearings of distinguished members of the Inn
long since passed away, we seem to feel a sort of melancholy, in spite
of all the gaiety around, from the consideration—which _will_ force
itself upon the mind—that the paths of law, like glory, ‘lead but to
the grave.’

Then, again, the timeworn and grim-looking escutcheons of the old
‘readers,’ which crowd the wainscoted walls, seem to be less grim than
usual. At the same time, it is impossible not to heave one little
sigh, as we look up and see in front of us the name and arms, say, of
Gulielmus Jones, Armiger, Cons. Domi. Regis, Lector Auct. 1745 (William
Jones, Esquire, Counsel of our Lord the King, Autumn Reader, &c.), and
wonder how much that learned gentleman enjoyed his Grand Days in the
period of comparative antiquity mentioned on his escutcheon.

Our business, however, is strictly with the present; and as one of the
features of Grand Day dinner is that the _mauvais quart d’heure_ is a
very long _quart_ indeed, we shall be able to look round before dinner
and see what is going on.

It requires no very great expenditure of speculative power to
comprehend the nature of the present assembly, numerous though it is.
Each member of it will readily and with tolerable accuracy tell us who
and what he is, as mathematicians say, by mere inspection on our part.
The fact is, we are really face to face with a world as veritable and
as varied as that outside, only compressed into a smaller compass.

Here are to be seen old, worn, sombre-looking men, some of them bending
under the weight of years, and actually wearing the identical gowns—now
musty and faded, like themselves—which had adorned their persons when
first assumed in the heyday of early manhood, health, high spirits,
and bright hopes. Among these old faces there are some that are genial
and easy-looking; yet, beyond a doubt, we are in close proximity to
many of those individuals who help to constitute that numerous and
inevitable host with which society abounds—the disappointed in life. We
see clearly that upon many of these patriarchal personages, the fickle
goddess has persistently frowned from their youth up, and that they
have borne those frowns with a bad grace and a rebellious spirit.

Hither, also, have come those who began their career under the benign
and auspicious influences of wealth and powerful friends; yet many
of these are now a long way behind in the race—have, in fact, been
outrun by those who never possessed a tithe of their advantages.
Such men form a very melancholy group; and we gladly pass from them
to another class of visitors. These are they whose lives have been
a steady, manful conflict with hard times and hard lines, but who,
uninspired by that devouring ambition already alluded to, have not
experienced the disheartening and chilling disappointment which has
preyed upon some of the others. These men, however, have seen many of
their early hopes and aspirations crushed; but they have borne the
grievance with patience and cheerfulness. They may have had a better
right to expect success than some of those who had been more sanguine;
but they have not sneered at small successes because they could not
achieve grander ones, and have not been ashamed to settle down as
plodders. They are most of them gentlemen in all senses of the word;
men of whom universities had once been proud, and who had also honoured
universities; men who, if unknown to the world at large, have yet
enlightened it; men whose bright intellects have perhaps elucidated
for the benefit of the world the mysteries of science, thrown light
upon its art, literature, and laws; and who, without having headed
subscription lists or contributed to so-called charities, have yet
been genuine benefactors to their species. But with all this, they are
nevertheless men who, destitute of the practical art of ‘getting on in
the world,’ have not made money. They have never condescended to ‘boo’
or toady, in order to do so, and thus they must be content to shuffle
along the byroads of life as best they can, after their own fashion.

Intermingled with such members of the Inn as we have just mentioned are
their opposites—those who are regarded as having been successful in the
race of life. How portly and well got-up they are; how bland are the
smiles which light up their jolly, comfortable-looking countenances,
whereon exist none of those lines so painfully conspicuous elsewhere.
There is no lack of geniality here; and you are certain that these
gentlemen possess happy, if not indeed hilarious temperaments, the
buoyancy of which is never endangered by the intrusion of any such
‘pale cast of thought’ as wears away the existence of those others whom
we have referred to.

This species of ‘successful’ barristers, fortunate though they may
be, and risen men, too, in one sense, must yet not be confounded with
that other set of men who make up the real _bonâ fide_ rising and
risen ones. These latter are grand fellows, and constitute the most
interesting group of the evening. In some respects they are like those
others we have spoken of, who have had to fight; but unlike them, they
have possessed and exercised the gifts of energy, tact, perseverance,
a wider acquaintance with human nature; and they have also possessed
the inestimable gifts of good physique and the capacity for unmitigated
labour. Like the other successful ones, they have risen; but unlike
them, they have achieved honours which appertain more closely to their
profession. They are the men from whose ranks our judicial strength
is recruited; men who in time may become statesmen too, and leave
distinguished names behind them. They are, in short, gifted honourable
men, whose promotion is a delight to their friends and a benefit to the
community, because the promotion of such is always well deserved.

Observable also in the present assembly are several of what may be
termed the purely ornamental limbs of the law, who are to be found in
the Inns of Court, and elsewhere. This class comprises country squires,
gentlemen at large generally, and so forth, who, although entitled to
the designation of ‘barrister-at-law,’ make no pretensions—at anyrate,
here—to any depth of legal learning. Yet, likely enough, many of
them are administrators of the law as county magistrates. However,
great lawyers are not always the best hands at discharging the often
rough-and-ready duties of ‘justices out of sessions;’ and whatever may
be the ability of our friends now in Hall, one thing concerning them is
clear, that they are to-night amongst the jolliest of the jolly. Look
at them greeting old friends, dodging about the Hall, replenishing here
and there their stock of legal _on dits_ and anecdotes for retailing to
admiring audiences elsewhere, discussing the affairs of the Inn and of
the nation generally!

Lastly, there are the youngsters, ranging from the shy students only
recently ‘of’ the Inn, to the youthful barristers who have just assumed
the wig and gown. Some of the latter are engaged in detailing to eager
and ambitious listeners the glories surrounding the first brief, while
all are brimful of mirth and hopefulness. To such, the business of
Grand Day appears tame in comparison with the high and substantial
honours which they all firmly believe to be in store for them in
the future. Ah! the future; that alluring period, so surpassingly
enchanting to us all in the days of youth!

Such is the assembly before us at Mansfield’s Inn on Grand Day of this
Trinity Term.

‘Dinner!’ shouts the head-porter, who stands at the door with his
great silver-headed baton in hand. We now see the use of this badge
of office; for immediately after enunciating the above welcome word,
he brings his baton heavily on to the floor three times. Then slowly
advancing up the Hall, we see that he is a sort of vanguard, or rather
_avant-courier_, of a host which is gradually following him, gentlemen
who walk two and two in procession, almost with funereal precision and
solemnity. As they proceed, the previous loud hum of conversation is
considerably lulled, and everybody is standing at his place. These are
the Benchers of the Inn and their guests. The proper designation of
the former is ‘Masters of the Bench’ of the Inn to which they belong.
Each is called ‘Master’ So-and-so; and the chief of their body is the
Treasurer of the Inn, who holds office for one year. The guests are
invariably persons of well-known position in the Army and Navy, the
Church, Politics, Law, Science, Literature, and Art. Sometimes royal
personages honour the Inns with their company on Grand Day; and it is
well known that several members of the royal family are _members_ of
certain Inns. The Prince of Wales is a Bencher of the Middle Temple,
and dined there on Grand Day of Trinity Term 1874, when an unusually
brilliant gathering appeared. The Prince on that occasion delivered a
humorous and genial speech, in which he reminded his learned friends of
the circumstance of Chancellor Sir Christopher Hatton opening a ball
in that very place with Queen Elizabeth. On the recent occasion of the
Prince again dining there, no speeches were delivered in Hall.

The procession moves on; and as many of the various guests are
recognised, the hum of conversation recommences. The Benchers wear
silk gowns; and now we are actually brushed by a K.G., whose blue
ribbon is unquestionably a _distingué_ addition to evening dress;
or by a G.C.B., whose red ribbon is so extremely becoming as to
set some of the youngsters speculating which they would rather be,
a Knight of the Garter or a Grand Cross of the Bath. Here we are,
then, with peers, right honourables, generals, judges, orators,
poets, painters, humorists, and so forth, around us; but, alas, in
the midst of so much grandeur, we are troubled by a prosaic monitor
whose demands are becoming imperative. In other words, we are getting
hungry. Well, we have not much longer to wait. ‘Rap, rap, rap!’ goes
the head-porter—this time with an auctioneer’s hammer on one of the
tables. Immediately dead silence ensues, and then ‘grace’ is read by
the Preacher of the Inn.

Now we fall to. There is soup, fish, joint, poultry, pastry, beer,
champagne, and one bottle of any other wine for each mess; and all for
half-a-crown! However, we know the Inn is rolling in wealth, and we
feel no compunction as to assisting in the heartiest way to carry on
the work of consumption going on in all directions.

Presently comes the rapping of Mr Head-porter again, who now proclaims
‘Silence!’ and having secured this, there comes another request to the
assembly: ‘Gentlemen, charge your glasses, and drink to the health of
Her Majesty the Queen.’ The Treasurer then rises and says: ‘Gentlemen,
“The Queen;”’ whereupon a great and enthusiastic shout of ‘The Queen!’
bursts forth. There is no more conservative body of men than the Bar of
England, nor has the Crown more staunch or more devoted supporters than
the gentlemen of the Long Robe. At the same time, no body of men in
this country has ever more firmly withstood any attempt to extend the
royal prerogative to the injury of the subject. The toast, ‘The health
of the Queen,’ is always drunk at these Bar gatherings with an amount
of fervour which betokens strong attachment to the constitution; and on
this particular occasion, the intensity and unanimity of the response
forcibly reminds one of the discharge of a sixty-eight-pounder!

As a rule, there is no speechifying in Hall, and there is none this
evening. The practice is for the Benchers to take dessert in one of
their reception-rooms, called ‘The Parliament Chamber.’ There, all
the speeches are made, and the speakers are refreshed by the choicest
products of the vineyard which money and good judgment can procure. Who
would not be a Bencher?

And now, so far as the ordinary portion of the assembly is concerned,
dinner is over. Grace again is said; and the Benchers, with their
guests, retire in the order in which they entered. But now there is
not altogether that grave air of solemnity about the procession which
distinguished it at its entrance; indeed, everybody looks and feels all
the better for the good things which have been partaken of. Neither the
distinguished guests nor those of the Benchers who are popular with
the Inn are allowed to depart without a friendly cheer; and if some
personage happens to be very popular indeed, his name is shouted out in
a fashion often bordering on the obstreperous.

The last two members of the retiring procession have now passed through
the door of the Hall, and away go also the majority of those who have
been dining. A few of the ‘Ancients’ or senior barristers are left
behind, to finish their wine and their chat; but by twelve o’clock the
Hall itself and its purlieus are once more deserted and silent.




BY MEAD AND STREAM.

BY CHARLES GIBBON.


CHAPTER XLV.—HIGH PRESSURE.

Madge reached home in the darkness, and opened the outer door so
quietly that she got up to her own room without being observed by
any of the inmates. Hat and cloak were off in a minute, and flung
carelessly anywhere—thus marking how completely her mind was distracted
from ordinary affairs; for, as a rule, she was careful in putting
things away.

Then!—she did not fling herself on the bed, and give way to an
overwhelming sense of despair, in the manner of heroines of romance.
She sat down; clasped hands lying on her lap, and stared into the
darkness of the room, which was luminous to her hot, dry eyes, and
wondered what it was all about.

Her engagement with Philip was broken off, and _he_ wished it to be
so! Now, how could that be? Was it not all some disagreeable fantastic
dream, from which she would presently awaken, and find him by her side?
They would laugh at the folly of it all, and be sorry that such ideas
could occur to them even in dreams. And that horrible, silent drive
to the station; the silent clasp of hands as the train started; no
word spoken by either since, in her pain and confusion, she had said
‘Good-bye,’ and he had echoed it—all that was a nightmare. She would
shake it off, rouse up, and see the bright day dawning.

But she could not shake it off so easily. He had said that she was to
consider herself free from all bond to him. He wished it—there was the
sting—and they had parted. It was a different kind of parting from the
one she had prepared herself to pass through with composure. Was it a
distorted shadow of her mother’s fate that had fallen upon her?

At this she started, and bravely struggled with the nightmare which had
weighed upon her from the moment the fatal word ‘Good-bye’ had escaped
her lips. They were not parted—absurd to think that possible. She took
blame to herself; she had been hasty, and had not made sufficient
allowance for his worried state. Perhaps she had been quickened to
anger by his apparent want of faith because she would not reveal what
she had promised to be silent about for his sake. She, too, felt
distracted at the moment; and want of faith in those we love is the
cruelest blow to the distracted mind.

Ay, she should have been more forbearing—much more forbearing,
considering how worried he was. And she could see that haggard face now
with the great dazed eyes of a man who is looking straight at Ruin,
feeling its fingers round his throat choking him.... Poor Philip. She
had been unkind to him; but it should be all put right in the morning.
She would tell Aunt Hessy and Uncle Dick, and they would force him away
from that dreadful work which was killing him, and——

And here what threatened to be a violent fit of hysteria ended in a
brief interval of unconsciousness.

The door opened, light streamed into the room, and Aunt Hessy, lamp in
hand, entered. Madge had slipped down to the floor, and long, sobbing
sighs were relieving the overpent emotions of her heart.

‘Thou art here, child, and in such a plight!’

The good dame did not waste more words in useless exclamations of
amazement and sorrow, but raised her niece to the chair and, without
calling for any assistance, applied those simple restoratives which a
careful country housewife has always at command for emergencies. The
effect of these was greatly aided by the sturdy efforts made by the
patient herself to control the weakness to which she had for a space
succumbed.

‘I’ll be better in a minute or two, aunt,’ were the first words she
managed to say; ‘don’t fret about me.’

‘I shall fret much, child, if thou dost not continue to fret less
thyself.’

‘I’ll try.... But there is such sore news. Philip says he is ruined,
and that he must—he must ... because it is Uncle Dick’s wish ... he
must’——

She was unable to finish the sentence.

‘Say nothing more until I give thee leave to speak,’ said Aunt Hessy
with gentle firmness; but the tone was one which Madge knew was never
heard save when the dame was most determined to be obeyed. ‘We have
heard much since thou hast been away; and we have been in fright about
thee, as it grew late. But though thou wert with friends, I knew that
home was dear to thee, whether thou wast glad or sad. So I came up
here, and found thee.’

‘But the ruin is not what I mind: it is his saying that we are to part.’

To her surprise, Aunt Hessy did not immediately lift her voice in
comforting assurance of the impossibility of such a calamity. She only
raised her hand, as if to remind her that silence had been enjoined.
Seeing that this was not enough, or moved by compassion for the
distress which shone through Madge’s amazement, she said:

‘We shall see about that, by-and-by.’

But Madge could not be so easily satisfied; for something in her aunt’s
manner suggested that there might be truth in Philip’s assertion of
the view her guardians would take of the position. He had said they
would hold it as contrary to common-sense that a man who had been
disinherited by his father and ruined by speculation should keep a girl
bound to wait for him till he had retrieved his fortune, or to marry
him and share—or rather increase his poverty. That was a cruel kind of
practical reason which she could neither understand nor appreciate. If
they really intended to insist upon such a monstrous interpretation of
the engagement she had entered into with Philip, then she must try to
explain how differently she regarded it. The moment of misfortune was
the moment in which she ought to step forward and say: ‘Philip, I am
ready to help you with all my strength—with all my love.’

Only Philip had the right to say: ‘No; you shall not do this.’

And there the poor heart sank again, for he had in effect said this: he
had told her that he _wished_ the bond to be cancelled. That was a very
bitter memory, even when she made allowance for his conviction that her
guardians expected him in honour bound to make such a declaration. Now,
however, she recognised self-sacrifice in his act; and feeling sure
that it was love for her which prompted it, took comfort.

Her first idea, then, was to find out what her guardians were to do,
and she was about to rise, with the intention of asking her aunt to go
with her to the oak parlour, when she was interrupted.

There was first a banging of doors below; next there was a deep voice
from the middle of the staircase:

‘I say, missus, art up there?’

Before any answer could be given, Uncle Dick presented himself with as
near an approach to a frown as his broad honest face was capable of
forming.

‘So you are here, Madge. Thought as much. I told the missus you could
take care of yourself; but a rare fuss you have been making among
us, running about here, there, and anyhow, when you know the day for
Smithfield is nigh, and ever so many things to do that you ought to do
for me. I say that ain’t like you, and I’m not pleased.’

While Crawshay was venting this bit of ill-humour, he stood in the
doorway, and as Madge had risen, the lamp was below the level of her
face, so that he could not see how ill she looked.

‘I hope I have not forgotten anything,’ she said hastily; ‘you remember
the first papers were filled up by—by Philip.’

‘They’re right enough; but here’s a letter from the secretary you
didn’t even open.’

‘It must have come after I went away.’

‘Like enough, like enough,’ he went on irritably, although the dame had
now grasped his arm, and was endeavouring to stop him. ‘Away early and
back late—that’s the shortest cut into a mess I know of.—Where have you
been?’

It was evident that the unopened letter of the Smithfield secretary had
less to do with his ill-humour than he was trying to make believe. The
question with which he closed his grumble suggested the real cause of
vexation.

‘Quiet thyself, Dick,’ his wife interposed. ‘Madge is not well
to-night, and it makes her worse to find thee angry.’

‘Could a man help being angry?’ he said, becoming more angry because of
his attention being called to the fact that he was so, as is the wont
of quick tempers. ‘Have you told her about them blessed letters?’

‘I have told her that we received them: to-morrow, we can tell her what
they are about.’

‘I would rather know at once, aunt,’ said Madge calmly, as she advanced
to Crawshay, and only a slight tremor of the voice betrayed her
agitation. ‘They concern Philip; and I should not be able to sleep if
anything was kept back from me. He is in cruel trouble, Uncle Dick, and
he says you want me to break off from him, and that has upset me a
little, although I know that you would not ask me to do such a thing,
when he is in misfortune.’

‘Dick Crawshay never left a friend in a ditch yet, and he had no
business to say that of me,’ blurted out the yeoman indignantly. Then,
checking himself, he added: ‘But there’s sense in it too. Maybe he
wants to break off himself; and I shouldn’t wonder, either, if he has
heard what that fellow Wrentham says about your goings-on with Beecham.’

‘Goings-on with Mr Beecham!’

‘Ay, that’s it.... Come now, lass, tell truth and shame the devil—was
it Beecham you went off in such haste to see to-day?’

‘I went to see Mr Shield, and saw Mr Beecham at the same time.’

‘Then it is true, mother—you see she owns to it,’ said Uncle Dick, his
passion again rising. ‘And you’ve been writing to Beecham and meeting
him underhand.’

‘Not underhand, uncle,’ she exclaimed, drawing back in surprise and
pain. The word ‘underhand’ assumed the significance of a revelation
to her; but even now she did not see clearly the extent of the
misconceptions to which her conduct was liable, if criticised by
unfriendly eyes.

‘You say it ain’t underhand! I say it’s mortal like it. You never said
a word about Beecham this morning, though you must have known that you
were going to see him.... Come now, did you not?’

He added the question in a softer tone, as if hoping for a negative
answer. But Madge evaded a direct reply.

‘What is in the letters to make you so vexed with me?’ she asked.

‘What’s in them?—Why, Shield says that Philip has been a fool, allowing
himself to be cheated on all sides, and that there’s nothing for him
but the Bankrupt Court. That’s a fine thing for a man to come to with
such a fortune in such a short time. But I might have known it would
end in this way—it’s the same thing always with them that set up for
improving on the ways of Providence.’

Uncle Dick was in his excitement oblivious of the fact, that whilst he
had cast some doubt on the success of Philip’s project, he had approved
the spirit of it. Madge did not observe the inconsistency; she was
so much astonished by what appeared to be the harsh language of Mr
Shield, notwithstanding the assurances he had given to her. But she was
presently set at rest on this point by Aunt Hessy.

‘Thou art forgetting, Dick, that Shield says he’ll see what can be done
to put Philip right again.’

Madge was relieved; for in spite of its improbability, the thought had
flashed upon her, that Austin Shield might have been deceiving her as
to his ultimate purpose regarding Philip.

‘That may be,’ continued Uncle Dick in a tone of general discontent;
‘like enough, he’ll spend more money on the lad, if so be as that
Beecham hasn’t got something against it; and blame me if ever I trust
a man more, if Beecham be a knave.—Now you can settle all that, Madge.
Seems you know more about him than any of us. Tell us what you know.’

There was no way of evading this request, or rather command; and yet
she could not comply with it immediately. She had been told that Philip
would be safe if she kept her promise.

‘What, will you not speak?’ thundered Uncle Dick, after he had waited a
few seconds. ‘You know that Beecham has to do with Shield, and will say
nought!’

‘There is nothing wrong about him,’ she pleaded.

‘Does Philip know you are in league with this stranger, and maybe
helping to ruin him?’

‘I have not told Philip, but’——

‘I don’t want your buts—honest folk don’t need them. That scamp
Wrentham is right; and it’s a bad business for Philip, and for you,
and for all of us. Think on it, and when you do, you’ll be sorry for
yourself.’

He wheeled about, and went downstairs with loud angry steps.

There was a long silence in the room; and then Madge turned with
pleading eyes to the dame.

‘He is very angry with me, aunt,’ she faltered.

‘I am sorry that I cannot say he is wrong, child,’ was the gentle, but
reproachful answer.




THE COMMERCIAL PRODUCTS OF THE WHALE.


Whales are more numerous than is usually supposed—that is to say, there
is a greater variety of these giants of the deep than the two or three
which are known to commerce; such animals being abundant in all seas,
so far as they have been explored. It is not, however, our intention
to enter into the natural history of these cetaceans farther than may
be necessary to understand their commercial value. Nor do we intend to
dwell on the dangers which are incidental to the pursuit of the whale,
of which it would not be difficult to compile a melancholy catalogue.
Terrible shipwrecks, vessels ‘crunched’ by the power of the ice without
a moment’s warning, others run into and destroyed by the animal itself;
pitiful boat-voyages, so prolonged as to cause deaths from hunger and
thirst; ships ingulfed amid the roar of the tempest, and crews never
heard of since the day they sailed—these are among the incidents which
have from its beginning marked the progress of the whale-fishery; the
mortality connected with which has often attracted attention, not only
in the icy regions of the arctic seas, but also in those of the Pacific
Ocean, in which, all the year round, men pursue the sperm-whale with
unceasing activity, at a risk to life and limb only faintly realised by
landsmen.

It is ‘for gold the merchant ploughs the main;’ and there are persons
who say that the risks encountered by whale-ships are not greater than
those common to most branches of the mercantile marine. ‘And if it
pays,’ say the advocates of whaling, ‘why not carry on the enterprise?’
But no matter what defence may be offered, whale-fishing has always
been much of a lottery, in which the few have drawn prizes, whilst the
many have had to be content with the blanks.

The fortunes of ‘whaling’ are exceedingly varied: one ship may capture
ten or twelve fish;[1] some vessels occasionally come home ‘clean;’
while others may each secure from two to half a dozen. We have before
us several records of the financial results of whale-fishing, in which
the profits and losses among Pacific whalers exhibit some striking
differences. One ship, for instance, places at her credit during her
voyage one hundred and thirty-two thousand dollars; but to the owners
of the fleet of whalers fishing from New Bedford, United States, in
1858, there accrued a loss of more than a million dollars. Again, a
Scottish whale-ship from Peterhead, in Aberdeenshire, was one season
fortunate enough to capture forty-four whales, the largest number
ever ‘fished’ by one vessel. The value of the cargo in oil and bone
considerably exceeded ten thousand pounds sterling. One of the largest
cargoes ever landed was brought home by the steamer _Arctic_ of Dundee,
commanded by Captain Adams, one of the ablest arctic navigators. It
consisted of the produce of thirty-seven whales, which, besides oil,
included almost eighteen tons of whalebone.

The only whales of commerce were at one time the great sperm-whale
of southern latitudes, and ‘the right’ or Greenland whale, both
of which are animals of gigantic size and great power, the latter
being undoubtedly the larger. No British vessels take part in the
sperm-fishery, their operations being confined to the arctic regions.
Dundee is now the chief whaling port, sending out annually sixteen
ships to Greenland. The Greenland whale, which our British whalemen
endure such dangers to procure, seldom exceeds sixty feet in length,
and is about half that number in circumference. An average-sized
specimen will weigh some seventy tons or more, and forms a mass of
matter equal to about two hundred fat oxen. One individual caught
by a Scotch whaler was seventy-two feet in length, with a girth
of forty-five feet, the total weight being reckoned at upwards of
one hundred tons. The chief product of the sperm and ‘the right’
whale—their oil—is of course common to both animals, and is obtained by
boiling their fat, or ‘blubber’ as the substance is technically called.

It is somewhat curious that in both of these whales the head is
the portion, size being considered, which is the most valuable. In
the sperm-whale, ‘the case,’ situated in the head, is filled with
a substance which is known as spermaceti, and brings a high price.
One of these giants of the deep will sometimes yield a ton of this
valuable substance, which is found, when the whale is killed, as an
oily fluid, that when prepared, gradually concretes into a granulated
mass. In the Greenland whale the great prize is ‘the bone’ with which
its head is furnished, and which at the present time is quoted as
being of the enormous value of two thousand two hundred and fifty
pounds per ton! The price in America is even higher, the last sales
in that country bringing two thousand five hundred pounds. It is only
the Greenland fish which yield this valuable commodity. The whale of
the Pacific is furnished with teeth; but ‘the right’ whale has in
lieu thereof a series of plates, or laminæ, on the upper jaw, which
are in reality the whalebone of commerce. The uses to which ‘bone’ is
applied vary according to the demands of fashion, so that within the
last hundred years the price has fluctuated exceedingly, and has been
quoted from almost a nominal price per ton up to the sum mentioned.
At one period, we are told in an American account of the fishery, the
rates for whalebone were so low that few whalemen would bring any of
it home, their space being of much greater value when packed with oil.
Threepence a pound-weight was at one time all that could be obtained
for it; now the price of bone is twenty shillings per pound-weight. It
may be explained that the yield of bone is as eight or ten pounds to
each barrel of oil. A vessel which brings home one hundred tuns of oil
will, in all probability, have on board six tons of whalebone.

There is a special product of the sperm-whale which is of greater
value than either spermaceti or whalebone; it is known as ambergris.
For a series of years there raged a hot controversy as to what this
valuable substance really was, the most extraordinary opinions being
offered regarding its origin, composition, and uses. One statement,
dated so far back as 1762, says that ambergris issues from a tree,
which manages to shoot its roots into the water, seeking the warmth
therefrom in order to deposit therein the fat gum of which it is the
source. ‘When that fat gum is shot into the sea, it is so tough that it
is not easily broken from the root unless by the strength of its own
weight. If you plant such trees where the stream sets to the shore,
then the stream will cast it up to great advantage.’ Another authority,
Dr Thomas Brown, in a work published in 1686, shows that an idea then
entertained was, that ambergris was only found in such whales as had
come upon the substance floating in the sea and swallowed it. In course
of time it was found that this precious commodity was generated in the
whale itself. An American doctor residing in Boston made it public in
1724, that some Nantucket whalemen, in cutting up a spermaceti whale,
had found about twenty pounds of the valuable substance, which, they
said, was contained in a cyst or bag without either outlet or inlet. As
a matter of fact, ambergris, which is an important drug, is a morbid
secretion in the intestines of the sperm-whale. Captain Coffin, in a
statement he made at the bar of the House of Commons, said that he had
lately brought home three hundred and sixty-two ounces of that costly
substance, which he had found in a sperm-whale captured off the coast
of New Guinea. At the time of Coffin’s examination, ambergris was of
the value of twenty-five shillings an ounce. The Pacific whalers search
keenly for this commodity, and large finds of it sometimes bring them a
rich reward.

Formerly, it was the oil which rendered the whaling voyages
remunerative, and made or marred the fortune of the venture, but the
case is now altered, owing to the enormous prices realised for bone.
The head of the sperm-whale is equal to about a third of its whole
size, and ‘the case’ yields spermaceti, which commands a high price;
but in the case of the Greenland whale, as we have shown, only a
comparatively small weight of whalebone is contained in the mouths
of each of them; but small as it is, the quantity tends to swell the
account and increase the dividends. Whaling ventures are usually made
by Companies, and nearly everybody engaged in the hazardous work has
a share in the venture—the men being partially paid by a share of the
oil-money. Whalers earn their wages hardly. The work—not to speak of
the dangers incurred—is always carried on at a high-pressure rate,
and is anything but agreeable. The pursuit and capture of a whale
are usually very exciting, some of these animals being difficult to
kill, even when the boats, after a long chase, come within such a
distance of them as admits of striking with the harpoon. Many are
the adventures which take place on the occasions of whale-killing;
though most of the animals attacked finally succumb. Then begins the
labour of securing the prize, and converting the products which it
yields into matter bearing a commercial value. The dead whale must be
brought either close to the ship, or the ship must be brought close
to the whale, which, in the icy waters of the high arctic latitudes,
involves a great deal of fatigue, the animal being sometimes killed at
a considerable distance from the ship. On some occasions a day will
elapse before it can be known that the whale will without doubt become
the prey of those who have found it, and several boats may require to
take part in the process of killing. As many as four boats may at one
time be ‘fast,’ as it is called, to the same animal—in other words,
they have all succeeded in planting their harpoons in the whale. But
the harpoon, even when shot from a gun into the fish, does not kill
it; the putting of the animal to death is accomplished by means of
what are called ‘lances,’ instruments which are used after the animal
has been harpooned. After that process has been successfully achieved,
the labour of capture, which may have taken from two to ten hours to
accomplish, is over. Instances are known where boats have been ‘fast’
for upwards of fifty hours before the whale was finally despatched.

The whale is usually dragged to the ship by the boats engaged in its
capture. Holes are cut in its tail, and ropes being then attached,
the laborious process of towing the gigantic carcass commences. Once
alongside of the ship, the work of flensing, or cutting-up of the
whale, is speedily in operation, all engaged being in a state of
ferment, and eager for further work of the same sort. The crew may be
likened to those animals which, having tasted blood, long for more.
The operation of removing the bone from the head of the whale is
first entered upon; this is superintended by an officer known as the
‘spectioneer,’ and who is responsible for this part of the process.
After the bone has been carefully dealt with, the blubber is cut
off the body in long strips, which are hauled on board by means of
a block-and-tackle. It is first cut into large squares, in which
condition it is allowed to remain till the salt water drains out of
it, a few hours, or even a day or two, being allowed, according to the
work on hand. The skin is then peeled off, and the mass of fatty matter
is further dealt with by being chopped into little pieces, which are
stowed away in barrels or tanks, to be brought home to the boileries,
in order to be, as we may say, distilled into a commercial product.
When the fish has yielded up its valuable products, the flensed carcass
is cut adrift. Sometimes the ponderous jawbones are preserved; when
that is the case, they are cut out of the head and lifted on board.
The strips of blubber vary in thickness from ten to sixteen inches, or
even more, according to the size and fatness of the fish. In general,
it averages twelve inches all over the body, the thickest portion being
at the neck, where twenty-two inches of blubber are sometimes found.
The yield of oil is of course in proportion to the size and condition
of the animal, and will run from five to twenty tuns. A whale caught
many years ago by the crew of the _Princess Charlotte_ of Dundee
yielded thirty-two tuns of oil. An examination of some old records
of the fishery shows fifteen hundred tuns of oil to the one hundred
and thirty-five fish of the Aberdeen fleet of eleven vessels; twelve
hundred and forty-three tuns to the Peterhead fleet of eleven ships
(three vessels had been lost), which captured eighty-eight whales and
three thousand seals.

In sperm-whale fishing, the process of flensing and disposing of the
carcass is much the same as in the Davis Straits’ fishery. When the
body has been stripped of the blubber, it is thrown loose, and is
permitted to float away, to become the prey of sharks and sea-birds
which are usually in attendance. In the process of dissecting the great
whale of the southern seas, the head is usually the last portion dealt
with. It is cut off and kept afloat till required, being carefully
secured to the vessel. The valuable contents of ‘the case’ are brought
on board by means of buckets, and are very carefully preserved, being
known as ‘head-matter.’ A large whale of the Pacific seas will yield
from seventy to ninety, or even on occasion a hundred barrels of oil.
Sperm oil is more valuable than train oil, the produce of the Greenland
fish. In a trade circular, we find as we write, ‘crude sperm’ quoted at
sixty-four pounds ten shillings per tun, the other sort being set down
as ranging from twenty-seven to thirty-two pounds. But the prices are
ever varying according to supply and demand. Spermaceti is offered at
about a shilling per pound-weight.

The ships which go whale-fishing from Scotland to the arctic regions
make an annual voyage, which lasts from five to nine months; but
sperm-whalers often remain at sea for a period of three years. They
boil out their oil as they cruise about in search of their prey; or
when blubber has so accumulated as to warrant the action, the ship will
put in at some convenient island, where the process of melting the fat
can be conveniently carried on.

We have no statistics of the number of vessels or men at present
engaged in the southern fishery; but the exciting nature of the
work being attractive to many persons, crews are never wanting when
ships are being fitted out to hunt the sperm-whale. At one period in
Great Britain, ‘whaling’ was an enterprise of great moment, and was
encouraged by government, which awarded bounty-money to ships engaged
in that particular enterprise. In the earlier years of the present
century over one hundred and fifty British ships were engaged in the
industry of whale-fishing; by 1828, the number had, however, fallen to
eighty-nine vessels, forty-nine of these being fitted out at Scottish
ports. In that season, eleven hundred and ninety-seven fish were
killed, the produce being thirteen thousand nine hundred and sixty-six
tuns of oil, and eight hundred and two tons of whalebone. Dundee, as
already mentioned, and Peterhead are the principal centres of the
British whaling industry, the number of vessels employed by the two
ports being between twenty and thirty; but for many years past, some
of these ships also make a voyage in the way of seal-fishing, which
sometimes proves a profitable venture. The total value of the seal and
whale fisheries so far as the Dundee fleet was concerned amounted last
year to £108,563; in 1882 it was £110,200; while in 1881 it reached
£130,900.

No recent statistics of an authentic kind of the seal-fishery have been
issued other than those contained in the newspapers; but from figures
before us relating to a period from 1849 to 1859, we find that over
one million seals were killed within that time by Scottish sealers
alone; and the success of individual crews in the killing of these
animals, it may be said, comes occasionally within the realms of the
marvellous. The oil obtained from the seals is as valuable as that got
from the arctic whales, whilst their skins are also of some commercial
importance. It was a happy circumstance that just as whale-fishing
began to fall off, gas as an illuminant became common; and although
train and sperm oils are still used in various manufactories, and
especially in jute-mills, the mineral oils which have been found in
such quantity have doubtless served many of the purposes for which
whale-oil was at one time in constant demand.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] The whale suckles her young, and is therefore a mammal, and not,
strictly speaking, a fish. It is, however, so called by all sailors.




MR PUDSTER’S RETURN.


IN TWO CHAPTERS.—CHAPTER I.

Mr Solomon Pudster and Mr Gideon Maggleby were bosom friends; nor
could they well be otherwise. They were both born on the 29th of May
1815, in Gower Street, Bloomsbury; Solomon entering upon the world’s
stage at an early hour in the morning at No. 69, and Gideon first
seeing the light about mid-day at No. 96. At the age of ten, the
boys were sent to Westminster School; at the age of seventeen, they
became fellow-clerks in the great West India warehouse of Ruggleton,
Matta, & Co.; and at the age of four-and-twenty they went into
partnership as sugar-merchants in Mincing Lane. At that period they
were bachelors; and being already sincerely attached one to the
other, they decided to live together in a pleasant little house in the
then fashionable neighbourhood of Fitzroy Square. For years they were
almost inseparable. Day after day they breakfasted and dined together
at home, and worked and lunched together in the City; and but for the
fact that the firm purchased a large sugar estate in Demerara, Solomon
Pudster and Gideon Maggleby would probably have never been parted for
more than a few hours at a time until death decreed a dissolution of
their partnership. The sugar estate, unfortunately, required a great
deal of looking after; and at regular intervals of two years, one of
the partners was obliged to cross the Atlantic and to remain absent
from his friend for five or six months. Solomon and Gideon alternately
undertook these troublesome expeditions, and braved the heat and
mosquitoes of the tropics; and meantime the firm of Pudster and
Maggleby prospered exceedingly; and no shadow of a cloud came between
the devoted friends—the former of whom, on account of his being a few
hours the older, was declared senior partner in the firm.

But in the year 1865 an important event happened. Mr Pudster and Mr
Maggleby ran down by train one evening to see the fireworks at the
Crystal Palace; and on their return journey they found themselves
in a compartment the only other occupant of which was a remarkably
buxom and cheery-looking widow of about forty years of age. The two
gentlemen, with their accustomed gallantry, entered into conversation
with her. They discovered that she and they had several friends in
common, and that she was, in fact, a certain Mrs Bunter, whose many
domestic virtues and abounding good-nature had often been spoken of in
their hearing. They were charmed with her; they begged, as if with one
accord, to be permitted to call upon her at her house in Chelsea; and
when, after putting her into a cab at Victoria Station, they started
off to walk home, they simultaneously exclaimed with enthusiasm: ‘What
a splendid woman!’

‘Ah, Gideon!’ ejaculated Mr Pudster sentimentally, a few moments later.

‘Ah, Solomon!’ responded Mr Maggleby with equal passion.

‘If only we had such an angel at home to welcome us!’ continued the
senior partner.

‘Just what I was thinking,’ assented Mr Maggleby, who thereupon looked
up at the moon and sighed profoundly.

‘No other woman ever affected us in this way, Gideon,’ said Mr Pudster;
‘and here we are at fifty’——

‘Fifty last May, Solomon.’

‘Well, we ought to know better!’ exclaimed Mr Pudster with honest
warmth.

‘So we ought, Solomon.’

‘But upon my word and honour, Gideon, Mrs Bunter’s a magnificent
specimen of her sex.’

‘She is, Solomon; and I don’t think we can conscientiously deny that
we are in love with her.’

‘We are,’ said Mr Pudster with much humility.

Having thus ingenuously confessed their passion, the two gentlemen
walked on in silence; and it was not until they were near home that
they again spoke.

‘I suppose that it will be necessary as a matter of formal business,’
suggested Mr Pudster diffidently, ‘for us to call upon Mrs Bunter and
apprise her of the state of our feelings. We mean, of course, to follow
the matter up?’

‘Certainly, certainly,’ agreed Mr Maggleby; ‘we mean to follow the
matter up.’

‘Perhaps the firm had better write to her and prepare her mind,’
proposed the senior partner, with kindly forethought.

‘The firm had better write to-morrow, Solomon; but, Solomon, it occurs
to me that the firm cannot marry Mrs Bunter. You or I must be the happy
man; and then, Solomon, we shall have to separate.’

‘Never!’ ejaculated Mr Pudster, who stopped and seized his friend by
the hand—‘never! You shall marry Mrs Bunter, and we will all live
together.’

‘Solomon, this magnanimity!’ murmured Mr Maggleby, who had tears in
his eyes. ‘No; I will not accept such a sacrifice. You, as the senior
partner, shall marry Mrs Bunter; and, with her permission, I will
stay with you. The firm shall write to prepare her mind. Business is
business. The firm shall write to-night; and I myself will take the
letter to the post.’

Half an hour later, Mr Maggleby handed to Mr Pudster a letter, of which
the following is a copy:

            14 MINCING LANE, CITY,
                _August 4, 1865._

    _To_ MRS FERDINAND BUNTER,
      _Matador Villa, Chelsea._

    MADAM—Our Mr Pudster will do himself the honour of calling
    upon you to-morrow between twelve and one, in order to lay
    before you a project which is very intimately connected with
    the comfort and well-being of the undersigned. We beg you,
    therefore, to regard any proposition that may be made to you by
    our Mr P., as made to you on behalf of the firm and with its
    full authority.—We remain, madam, most devotedly yours,

            PUDSTER and MAGGLEBY.

‘How will that do?’ asked Mr Maggleby with conscious pride.

‘Excellently well, Gideon,’ said Mr Pudster. ‘But don’t you think that
“most devotedly yours” sounds rather too distant? What do you say to
“yours admiringly,” or “yours to distraction?”’

‘“Yours to distraction” sounds best, I think,’ replied Mr Maggleby
after considerable reflection. ‘I will put that in, and re-copy the
letter, Solomon.’

‘We are about to take an important step in life,’ said Mr Pudster
seriously. ‘Are you sure, Gideon, that we are not acting too hastily?’

‘Mr Pudster!’ exclaimed Mr Maggleby warmly, ‘we may trust these sacred
promptings of our finer feelings. We have lived too long alone. The
firm needs the chaste and softening influence of woman. And who in this
wide world is more fitted to grace our board than Mrs Bunter?’

‘So be it, then,’ assented the senior partner.

Mr Maggleby re-copied the letter, signed it with the firm’s usual
signature, and carried it to the nearest letter-box. When he returned,
he found his friend waiting to go to bed, and trying to keep himself
awake by studying the marriage service.

On the following forenoon, Mr Pudster, with the scrupulous punctuality
that is characteristic of City men, called at Matador Villa, Chelsea,
and was at once shown into the presence of Mrs Bunter, who was waiting
to receive him. ‘I am quite at a loss to understand why you have done
me the honour of coming to see me to-day,’ said the widow. ‘From your
letter, I judge that you have some business proposal to make to me.
Unfortunately, Mr Pudster, I am not prepared to speculate in sugar. I
am not well off. But, perhaps, I am under a misapprehension. The letter
contains an expression which I do not understand.’

‘It is true,’ replied the senior partner, ‘that we _have_ some hope of
persuading you to speculate a little in sugar; and there is no reason
why your want of capital should prevent your joining us.’

‘I quite fail to grasp your meaning,’ said Mrs Bunter.

‘Well, I am not very good at explanations,’ said Mr Pudster; ‘but I
will explain the situation as well as I can. You see, Mrs Bunter, Mr
Maggleby my partner, and myself, are bachelors and live together. We
find it dull. We long for the civilising influences of woman’s society.
We are, in fact, tired of single-blessedness. The firm is at present
worth a clear five thousand a year. It will support a third partner, we
think; and so we propose, Mrs Bunter, that you should join it, and come
and take care of us in a friendly way.’

Mrs Bunter looked rather uncomfortable, and was silent for a few
moments. ‘You are very good,’ she said at last; ‘but although I am not
well off, I had not thought of going out as a housekeeper. The late Mr
Bunter left me enough for my little needs.’

‘I hope so indeed, madam. But we don’t ask you to come to us as a
housekeeper simply. Marriage is what we offer you, Mrs Bunter. In the
name of Pudster and Maggleby, I have the honour of proposing for your
hand.’

‘Mercy!’ exclaimed Mrs Bunter in some agitation. ‘Surely you would not
have me marry the firm?’

‘I put it in that way,’ said Mr Pudster, ‘because Maggleby and I are
practically one and the same. But I will be accurate. The proposition
is, Mrs Bunter, that you should become the wife of—ahem!—the senior
partner; and that Gideon Maggleby should live with us in his old
sociable way. Excuse my blunt way of expressing myself, Mrs Bunter.’

‘Then you, Mr Pudster, are the senior partner!’ said Mrs Bunter, with a
very agreeable smile. ‘I am very much flattered, I assure you; but your
proposal requires consideration.’

‘No doubt,’ assented Mr Pudster. ‘The firm is willing to wait for your
reply. In matters of business we are never in a hurry.—When may we look
for your answer?’

‘Well, you shall have a note by to-morrow morning’s post,’ replied Mrs
Bunter. ‘I may say,’ she added, ‘that I have heard a great deal of your
firm, Mr Pudster; and that I am conscious that it does me great honour
by thus offering me a partnership in it.’

‘Indeed, madam, the honour is ours!’ said Mr Pudster, bowing as he
retired.

No sooner had he departed than the widow burst into a long and merry
fit of laughter. Her first impulse was to write and refuse the
ridiculous offer; but as the day wore on, she thought better of the
affair; and in the evening, after dinner, she sat down quite seriously,
and wrote a letter as follows:

            MATADOR VILLA, CHELSEA,
                _August 5, 1865._

    _To_ MESSRS PUDSTER and MAGGLEBY,
      _14 Mincing Lane, City._

    GENTLEMEN—I have decided to accept the very flattering offer
    which was laid before me to-day on your behalf by your Mr
    Pudster. If he will call, I shall have much pleasure in
    arranging preliminaries with him.—I remain, gentlemen, very
    faithfully yours,

            MARIA BUNTER.

‘I must fall in with their humour, I suppose,’ she reflected. ‘And
really, Mr Pudster is a very nice man, and almost handsome; and I’m
sure that I shall do no harm by marrying him. Besides, it is quite true
that they must want some one to look after them. If they go on living
by themselves, they will grow crusty and bearish.’ And Mrs Bunter sent
her maid out to post the letter.

Three weeks later, the widow became Mrs Pudster; Mr Maggleby, of
course, officiating as best-man at the wedding, and being the first
to salute the bride in the vestry after the ceremony. Thenceforward,
for a whole year, the three members of the firm lived together in
complete harmony; and the pleasant history of their existence was
only interrupted by Mr Pudster’s enforced departure for Demerara in
September 1866. Mr Maggleby, it is true, offered to go instead of
him; but Mr Pudster would not hear of it; and Mr Maggleby was obliged
to confess that business was business, and that it was certainly
Mr Pudster’s turn to brave the mosquitoes. And so, after confiding
his wife to the care of his friend, Mr Pudster departed. During his
absence, all went well; and in March 1867 he returned to England. But
this time the heat had been too much for poor Mr Pudster. His wife
noticed that he was looking unwell. Maggleby, with sorrow, perceived
the same. Pudster laughed. Nevertheless, he soon took to his bed; and
after a long and painful illness, died.

The grief of Mrs Pudster and Mr Maggleby was terrible to witness.
Mrs Pudster talked of retiring from the world; and Gideon Maggleby
disconsolately declared that he had no longer anything left to live
for. No one, therefore, will be much surprised to hear that towards the
end of March 1868, Mr Gideon Maggleby led Mrs Solomon Pudster to the
altar.

‘Solomon will bless our union,’ Mr Maggleby had said, when he proposed.

‘Ah, dear sainted Solomon!’ Mrs Pudster had exclaimed as she fell
weeping upon Mr Maggleby’s breast.




SUDDEN RUIN.


In a former paper (April 19, 1884), instances were cited of fortunes
suddenly made, not by inheritance or industry, but by what people
are pleased to call luck. Cases of sudden ruin are less frequent,
for, generally speaking, the wreck of a man’s fortune is like that of
a ship: some rock is touched; water flows in; frantic attempts are
made to lighten the vessel or to steer it into port; and finally, the
foundering is slow. The striking upon a rock, however, is commonly with
fortunes, as with ships, a sudden accident. It may be the result of
careless or incapable steering; or it may be caused by a combination
of adverse tides and winds, which no human skill can stem, and which
hurry on the ship helplessly to destruction, inevitable, though it is
not always foreseen. The rock, in whatever way it may be reached, is
the determining cause of ruin; and when we speak of a man having been
suddenly ruined, we mean that the calamity which brought him to poverty
by degrees more or less rapid, occurred at a time and in a manner which
took himself and his friends by surprise.

We are happily exempt in this country from those overwhelming disasters
occasioned by political convulsions. Those who witnessed the flight of
French ladies and gentlemen from their country upon the downfall of the
Second Empire heard tales of misfortune not easily to be forgotten.
Senators and prefects who, in July 1870, were living in luxury and
power, drawing large salaries, and secure of the future, were towards
the middle of September huddling in lodging-houses of towns on the
English south coast; and along with them were bankers who had been
obliged to suspend payment, and manufacturers and landowners of the
eastern provinces who had fled from the tide of invasion, after seeing
their factories or fields burnt, ravaged, and overrun by the enemy.

In most of these cases, ruin had been sudden and irremediable, so much
so, as to appal sympathising British minds. And yet vicissitudes quite
as pitiable had been witnessed in London a few years before—that is,
on the Black Friday of May 1866, when, within a single day, hundreds
of fortunes were wrecked in the City. For the most part, the people
who were ruined on this awful Friday had had no warning of the fate
impending over them; and this must needs be so whenever banks or
financial companies fail. The credit of these establishments is like a
piece of glass, which must remain undamaged, or there is an end to its
value. For self-preservation, banks and companies feel bound to conceal
their difficulties till these are past mending; and thus it generally
happens that whenever a House suspends payment, almost all its
customers are utterly unprepared. What this means, we all know, if not
from personal experience, at least from misfortunes which have fallen
upon persons of our acquaintance. Our country neighbour who lived in
such grand style, returns from town one evening with a haggard face.
A few days later it is announced that his house is to let; there is
a sale; a notice among the bankruptcies in the _Gazette_; the family
quietly leave their home; and from that time, only intimate friends
know for certain what has become of them. Perhaps, years afterwards,
somebody who knew the neighbour in great wealth, finds him eking out
a penurious existence in the suburbs of some large city. Among the
hundreds of acres of cheap houses which form the outskirts of London,
the people ‘who have seen better days’ are an unnumbered multitude.
Every suburban clergyman and doctor knows some, and generally too many
of them; every bachelor in quest of furnished lodgings is pretty sure
to stumble upon several people in this plight. Auctioneers and brokers,
however, know them best of all, for it is they who play the chief part
in the closing act of the drama of Ruin, when the last waifs of former
wealth—the pieces of good old furniture, the pictures, china, books,
and other such long-treasured valuables, have to be sold off to buy
necessaries.

One of the most frequent and deplorable agents of sudden ruin is
the dishonest partner. No business can be managed without mutual
confidence between those who conduct it; and though, when we hear
that a commercial man has brought himself within reach of the law,
we are inclined to doubt if his partner can have been unaware of his
malpractices, yet it must be obvious that the dishonesty of one partner
too often arises from the unsuspicious simplicity of the other. There
are even instances in which no amount of sagacity will save a man from
the enterprises of a roguish partner. The following is a very common
case: A and B being partners, A dies, and his son succeeds to his share
of the business. So long as A was alive, the speculative tendencies of
B were kept in check; but young A has not the same experience as his
father; he has learned to respect B; he looks to him for guidance; and
if B has made up his mind to extend the business of the firm by new
methods, now that he is head-partner, the junior partner will generally
be a mere tool in his hands. If young A be more fond of pleasure than
business, he will of course be even less than a tool—a mere cipher; and
B will be left to manage matters as he pleases, until he succeeds in
his schemes, and proposes to buy A out of the business; or fails, and
brings A to poverty and disgrace. It is a cruel thing that if B has
absconded, A will have to bear the entire brunt of creditors’ wrath,
and perhaps be criminally punished for his innocence. But partners have
learned this lesson so often, that it is almost a wonder how any sane
man can assume responsibilities without ascertaining the nature and
extent of them. It is certainly not for the public interest that the
sudden ruin of an honest partner should be pleaded in extenuation for
his ignorance or carelessness.

Let us take some other causes of sudden ruin. We may set aside the
destruction of property by fire or flood, as offering examples too
many and obvious; nor does the sudden ruin of spendthrifts by cards
or betting call for notice. But the ruin which comes to a man through
sudden loss of character in his trade or profession is always most
lamentable, especially when the offence perpetrated was unintentional,
and did not appear to call for so heavy a punishment. The chemist
who asked to be discharged from serving on the jury in ‘Bardell _v._
Pickwick’ on the ground that his assistant would be selling arsenic to
the customers, expressed an alarm in which there was nothing jocular at
all. We know of a chemist whose assistant committed this very mistake
of supplying arsenic for some other drug, and three children were
poisoned in consequence. The chemist was totally ruined. A coroner’s
jury having brought in a verdict of manslaughter against him, he took
his trial at the assizes, and was acquitted. But doctors ceased to
recommend him; the public avoided his shop; his appointment as local
postmaster was taken from him, and in a short time he became bankrupt.
Poisoning by inadvertence has been the ruin of many a chemist, and of
not a few country doctors who supply their own medicines.

But we remember an instance of a young doctor destroying his career by
means just the contrary of this—that is, by suspecting that poison had
been administered, when such was not the case. One of his patients, a
lady, who seemed to have nothing worse than a cold, died very suddenly.
The doctor had reason to believe that this lady and her husband had
been living on bad terms, so he not only refused to certify as to
the causes of death, but openly hinted his suspicions that there had
been foul-play. At the inquest, however, it was proved that the lady
had died from heart-disease; and the reports about her having been
on bad terms with her husband were shown to have proceeded from the
malicious tattle of a busybody. As a result of this affair, the doctor
lost almost all his patients. It was thought that he had not behaved
with discretion; and his ruin was consummated by an action for slander
brought against him by the widower, whom he had too hastily accused of
poisoning.

This action for slander reminds us of another case of ruin which had
some comical features, and was in fact related to us in a very humorous
way by a French journalist. The gentleman in question had accepted the
editorship of a small daily newspaper published in a Belgian city. His
salary was to be twenty pounds a month, with free board and lodging
in the house of his employer, a notary, who owned the newspaper. Our
friend discharged his duties to everybody’s satisfaction for about five
years, when a bustling young journalist of the locality became intimate
with the notary, and pointed out to him that he—the bustling one—could
edit the paper quite as well as our friend, and for half the money.
Our friend had just applied for an increase of salary; so the notary,
with unreflecting parsimony, resolved to dispense with his services,
and installed the bustling young man in his chair. But not more than
a fortnight afterwards, the Bustling One, either from negligence, or
because he had some private grudge to pay off, inserted a libellous
paragraph against a banker in the town. An action was instituted. The
proprietor of the paper was sentenced to pay a large sum by way of
damages, with all the costs of the trial, and the advertisement of the
judgment—filling about two columns of small print—in twenty newspapers
of France and Belgium. This heavy fine, the numberless worries
attendant upon the action for libel, and the loss of professional
status which accrued to the lawyer from the whole thing, proved the
death of the newspaper. As our friend remarked: ‘I think the notary
would have found it cheaper to raise my salary.’

It may happen, however, that to make inopportune demands for an
increase of salary will ruin not him who refuses, but him who asks.
A case starts to our recollection of a man who had an excellent
appointment in the City. He was drawing one thousand pounds a year for
work which required some talent, but was pretty easy and pleasant;
moreover, he was on the fair way to better things. But he was too
impatient. His employers bore with him for a while, and in fact raised
his salary four times within three years, for they fully appreciated
his services. A day came, however, when they had to tell him plainly
that his demands were unreasonable; upon which he stood on his dignity
and resigned. He quite expected that he would instantly find in the
City another situation as good as that which he had left; but he was
not able to get an appointment at so much as half of his former salary.
Everywhere his presumption in asking for twelve hundred pounds a year
was laughed at; and he soon had to acknowledge to himself that in
the former situation which he had so foolishly thrown up he had been
most generously overpaid. Deeply mortified, too proud to return to
his old employers, who would have been willing to take him back, the
misguided man became a City loafer; he tried to set up in business for
himself without sufficient capital, and, after a series of luckless
speculations, took to drinking, and was no more heard of. This story
points a moral, which ambitious young men do not always sufficiently
lay to heart—namely, that to resign a good berth before making sure of
a better is to run the risk of being left out in the cold. It is by no
means a recommendation to a man out of place to have formerly received
a high salary and to have served under first-rate employers. All the
persons to whom he applies will naturally conclude that he must have
left his good appointment for unavowable reasons; and even the best
certificates of character from his old masters will not serve to dispel
this notion. We knew an unwise young man, who, leaving a good place out
of pure caprice, was earnestly advised by his employer to think twice
of what he was doing. ‘You will find it a positive disadvantage to have
served in our House,’ said his employer; ‘for we are known to be just
masters, and nobody will believe that you left us of your own accord.’
The young man would not heed the warning; and the upshot was that he
had to emigrate, having failed in all his endeavours to get another
situation.

The ruin which is produced by business competition does not come
within the scope of this paper. Everybody must sympathise with the
snug old-fashioned inn which is suddenly brought to nought by the big
Railway Hotel, and with the petty tradesmen who are impoverished
by the establishment in their midst of some colossal ‘universal
provider;’ but these are unavoidable incidents in the battle of life.
An interesting class of sufferers remains to be specified in persons
who own house-property, and find the value of their houses suddenly
depreciated by causes beyond their control. Let a sensational murder
be committed in a respectable street, and the rents of the houses in
that street will probably fall twenty-five per cent.; while the house
in which the deed was done will in all likelihood remain untenanted for
years. A murder, the perpetrator of which escaped detection, naturally
marks a house with almost indelible disrepute; people do not like to
inhabit such a place; and the landlord is often reduced to giving up
the house at a mere nominal rent to be the abode of some charity. An
epidemic, again, will play havoc with the value of houses, by getting a
whole locality noted as unhealthy; and this it may be said is the fault
of the landlords; but it is not always so. We were acquainted with a
gentleman who became possessed by inheritance of a row of houses, as
to the antecedents of which he knew nothing. Soon after he had got
this property, typhoid fever broke out in one of the houses and spread
down the row. The drains were examined, and found in good order; but
under one of the houses was discovered a vast cesspool, caused by the
drains of two large houses which had formerly stood near the site.
The emptying of this pool, the building of new foundations to several
of the houses, the laying down of new water-pipes, &c., proved a very
costly piece of work, and brought little profit when it was finished;
for the row of houses had got a bad name, and years elapsed before the
landlord could find good tenants for them even at much reduced rents.
This was really a hard case; and the harder because the landlord, being
a high-principled man, felt bound to pay substantial indemnities to
those who had suffered through the bad condition of his property.




BACK FROM ‘ELDORADO.’


It was a scorching afternoon in October, when, with much clatter and
racket, cracking of long whips, and a volley of eccentric profanity
from the Dutch conductor and his sable satellites, the mule-train of
that eminent Cape patriot Adrian de Vos scrambled headlong, as it were,
out of the market-place of Kimberley in ‘the land of diamonds,’ jolted
and swung through the ‘city of iron dust-bins,’ finally disappearing in
a cloud of dust adown the Dutoitspan Road.

I may state that I was awaiting the arrival of the ‘veldt express’
at the little oasis in the desert, dear to all acquainted with the
‘Eldorado’ of the Cape Colony, by the name of Alexandersfontein.
Distant only a few miles from the hot fever-stricken ‘camp,’ it is
blessed with a spacious hotel and—luxury of luxuries—a veritable
open-air swimming-bath, together with a meandering brook, which
gladdens the eye of the parched, home-sick, and, most likely,
disappointed searcher after diamondiferous wealth. I had spent the most
part of the day with an Irish surgeon stationed there, who had been
doing his best to persuade me to travel to Cape Town in the orthodox
manner, by stage-coach, and not by the ‘heavy goods,’ as it is termed;
but during the last year or so I had roughed it too much to care for
a little additional hardship, and I wanted to complete the tale of my
experiences in South Africa by personal contact with those unfortunates
who from time to time abandoning their last dream of success, cast down
and forsaken, broken in health, wealth, and estate, set forth gloomily
on the journey back from Eldorado.

We were not altogether without amusement at Alexandersfontein, for, in
addition to the attractions of the swimming-bath, there was the mild
excitement of vaccinating ‘niggers,’ brought in at intervals by an
Africander scout, the smallpox scare being at the time at its height,
and my friend a government officer. Nevertheless, I confess I was
glad when a pillar of dust, rising up from the arid road far away to
the deep-blue sky overhead, announced that the mule-train was fairly
_en route_ for us. I am glad now that it was dark when they arrived,
because, if I had seen the accommodation provided by that philanthropic
conveyer of broken hearts and shattered fortunes to the coast, I think
it very likely that I might have declined to obey the order shouted at
me through the still, sub-tropical night, to ‘get aboard.’ As it was,
clutching my rifle with one hand, and grasping a leathern portmanteau,
destined for a pillow, in the other, I struggled upward over the
disselboom, thrust my head underneath a flapping canvas covering
stretched over the whole length and breadth of the wagon, and receiving
a friendly but rather violent impetus from my friend the surgeon,
shot forward into the midst of a conglomeration of human forms, tin
cases, deal boxes, ropes, and sacking. I was welcomed with anathemas,
apparently proceeding from the internal economy of a ‘mealy’ bag in
the corner. I could hear my Irish friend shouting a last adieu, which
mingled strangely with the vociferations of the half-caste driver to
his mules; and then, as the whole machine lurched heavily but rapidly
forward, I collapsed against the corner of a huge tin case, slid thence
into a hollow caused by the merchandise, and thus cramped up in a hole
about two feet in width, prepared to pass the night. A dismal lantern,
swinging and jolting overhead, threw a sickly gleam around; the keen
wind of the karroo whistled past as we pushed onward in the darkness,
and forward into the wilderness, leaving behind us the land of untold
riches, the wonderful camp with its mines assessed at millions, its
busy streets, its citizens with but one aim, the greed of gold—and
its quiet burial-place, where hundreds of brave young Englishmen lie,
wrapped in that deep sleep to which no dreams of avarice may come.

Our route lay over wide-stretching plains of fine sand, studded with
stunted thorn; flanked on either side by lone mountain ranges, whose
lofty heads assume fantastic shape of cone, table-land, or pyramid;
here and there a miserable watercourse threading its way to the
babbling Modder or stately Orange River. A solitary, silent land, where
the glad song of birds is unheard, but the ever-watchful vulture
circles overhead; where the sweet scent of flowers is unknown, but the
gaunt mimosa stretches out its bare branches, and seems to plead with
the brazen skies for a cloud of moisture. Far distant from each other
are the white, flat-roofed Boer farmhouses; while midway to the railway
centre of Beaufort West lies the quaint Dutch village of Hopetown with
its ‘nightmare’ church; and farther on, Victoria, nestling at the foot
of a great brown hill.

Monotonous? Well, truly I tired of the all-pervading sand, of the glare
of the fierce sun, of the jolting and bumping of the springless wagon;
but there was the abiding excitement of the commissariat question, the
occasional sight of a flock of wild ostriches, the rough incidents of
the nightly outspan, and, as the cumbrous machine rolled onward over
the starlit plain, the exchange of confidences, or the singing of songs
to the accompaniment of a wheezy accordion, which one of the party—a
miserable little Israelite from Houndsditch—had provided.

I think the most remarkable amongst the ‘voyagers’ was a tall gaunt
man, whose snow-white beard and sunken cheeks bore evidence to the fact
that time had not dealt gently with him. He reminded me irresistibly
of King Lear; and when camping for the night, he crouched over his
solitary pannikin with his hands stretched out, to prevent any disaster
to the blazing structure of sticks and ‘peat,’ his white locks blowing
in the wind, and his keen, hard, glittering eye eagerly watching for
the right moment at which to insert his pinch of hoarded tea, he
presented a mournful embodiment of hopeless failure. He was a lonely,
morose man; defeat and disaster had occurred to him so often, that he
sought for no sympathy, and expressed no hopes for the future. When the
lighter spirits in this storm-beaten company were essaying to laugh
at dull care, and even making jests at the bitterness of the divers
fates which had overtaken them, he would sit apart with folded arms,
now and again muttering to himself, and once surprising me with an apt
quotation from a Latin author in the original. I am afraid we were
all inclined to laugh at him for his queer ways and solitary habits;
but I never did so after one night, when I found him, some distance
from our camp, kneeling on the bare sands, his arms tossed aloft to
the stars, that shone like lamps in the dark-blue dome of the midnight
sky, and his lips babbling incoherently of the wife and children, home
and kindred, he had left long, long ago, never to see again in this
world, in his thirst for the gold which had lured him from continent to
continent.

We had another victim of the gold-mania with us in the person of a
bald-headed Irish bookbinder. Of all the gentle enthusiasts I have
ever met, he was the most extraordinary. He had just returned from
a particularly disastrous prospecting trip to the newly discovered
gold-field euphoniously termed ‘the Demon’s Kantoor;’ and previous to
that, he had made equally unsatisfactory migrations into Swazieland,
the Delagoa Bay, and other regions, returning from each of them ragged,
penniless, but happy, to recruit his finances with a spell of work at
his trade in the towns, whilst devising some fresh scheme of martyrdom
for the cause of the glittering metal that had bewitched him. He was
a devout Protestant, and would gravely rebuke any who gave way to the
very common colonial vice of hard swearing; and during our halts by the
wayside, generally stole away to any available shade, and taking forth
from the bosom of his ragged red shirt a book of devotion, would read
therein, heedless of the shouts and laughter of the drivers and the
screams of the mules; though, to be sure, I have reason to believe that
the precious volume contained a good deal about ‘the gold of Ophir’ and
‘the land of Midian.’ He admitted, with a genial smile, that he had
dug a grave for the fruits of six months’ self-denying labour amid the
hillocks and boulders of the Demon’s Kantoor; but he hoped by about a
year’s industry in Cape Town to realise sufficient to enable him to
penetrate into the Kalahari Desert, where, if he escaped the poisoned
arrow of the Bushman, or the slow death from starvation or thirst, he
was perfectly certain of finding nuggets of wondrous size, and ‘rotten
reef’ worth fabulous amounts. Indeed, so happy was he at the prospect
of his good fortune, that in the fullness of his heart, he sought to
raise the spirits of a dark, melancholy young man, by offering to share
it with him. But the latter only shook his head and buried his face
in his hands, being engaged just then in a retrospect of his fallen
fortunes, from which nothing but an occasional fit of assumed reckless
levity could rouse him. Poor fellow! He was leaving every farthing
he had in the world—the remnant of a noble patrimony—in a worthless
diamond mine in the vicinity of Kimberley; and he was haunted with the
memory of a golden-haired wife and two blue-eyed children on whom the
‘camp-fever’ had laid its deadly hand.

As for the light-hearted actor, who, by some strange mischance, had
found himself left on ‘the Fields’ with the theatre closed and the
company gone, and had just raised enough by the sale of his wardrobe to
‘catch a storm,’ as he expressed it, to waft him to Cape Town—he could
not understand what despair or earnestness meant. His delight was to
astonish the Kaffirs and half-breeds, as they crouched around the fires
at night, with extravagant selections from the transpontine drama. He
would make their eyes roll and their teeth chatter by holding converse,
in sepulchral tones, with the incorporeal air, and then set them all
grinning with glee at some fanciful imitation of domestic animals.
He was never tired of telling stories of his wanderings, and joined
heartily in the laughter at some ludicrous blunder which had for the
nonce involved him in ruin. I am afraid he was not very particular as
to his method of getting out of scrapes, for he related with great glee
how, being deserted by a manager in Japan, he and a brother _artist_
got up an acrobatic performance for the benefit of the natives. As
neither of them knew anything about the business, the grumbling was
excessive; and the climax was reached when, having attained to some
‘spread-eagle’ position on the framework they had erected on the
stage, and being quite unable to get down gracefully, he let go, and
fell with a crash. ‘We then,’ he said, ‘announced an interval of
ten minutes, secured the receipts from the innocent heathen at the
“Pay-here” box, and—fled the city!’ He had gone to the Diamond Fields,
because he had been told he could make ‘kegs of dollars’ there; and he
trusted in chance or good fortune to convey him to Australia.

Despite the coarse food and its coarser preparation, the nights spent
upon the ground beneath the wagons, the awful shaking over the mountain
tracks, the dust, the thirst, the intolerable heat, there are many
pleasant recollections of that memorable excursion. But when I see
the young, the hearty, the strong, setting off, in the pride of their
manhood, in search of that prize which flattering Hope assures them
waits in distant lands for enterprise and courage to secure, I wonder
how many will escape the dangers of ‘flood and field,’ to undertake,
broken in spirit, bankrupt in health and wealth, the journey back from
Eldorado.




STEEL.


Steel, we are frequently and emphatically reminded, is the material of
the future. Passing from assertions respecting the time to come, let
us concern ourselves with the present and the past of the material,
and inquire why and wherefore steel should be held up so prominently
as destined to make its mark in the future. Every age has stamped for
its own not only a certain style of architecture or a peculiar class
of construction, but it has also impressed into its service different
materials, by means of which it has carried out those designs to which
it has given birth. As formerly wood gave place to iron, so now, slowly
yet surely, is the use of iron waning before the enhanced advantages
accruing from steel in large constructive works. As ductile as iron,
and possessed in a superior degree of tenacity, more uniform and
compact, it is not a matter of surprise that steel should have largely
usurped the position formerly occupied by iron in the engineering and
constructive world, or that engineers and architects should gladly
avail themselves of such a material in their designs, more especially
when they desire to combine the maximum of strength and security
with the minimum of weight and mass. So slight is the difference in
appearance between rolled iron and rolled steel, that the casual
observer will be unable to distinguish between the two substances. A
certain amount of experience and skill is requisite before the eye
becomes sufficiently educated to appreciate the appearance presented by
each material. Nor should we omit to notice a method both simple and
expeditious by which all doubts may be set at rest. A drop of diluted
nitric acid placed on a piece of steel will at once separate the carbon
in the steel, producing a black stain on its surface. On iron, no such
effect will result.

The extensive works for manufacturing steel in England, Wales,
Scotland, and on the continent, amply testify to the growth and vigour
of the industry; and if further proof is wanted, it is supplied by
the fact of the conversion of their plant by existing ironworks, to
enable them to turn out steel. Such steps—though frequently producing
financial distress, happy if only temporary—show the direction in which
the commerce of the present day is moving.

That steel should so speedily overcome the initial difficulties
incident to the introduction of every new material, adduces important
evidence in its favour. In shipbuilding, for example, the inconvenience
and delay occasioned by employing steel side by side with iron
presented a formidable barrier to its use, the alternate demand
for iron and steel built vessels causing no small confusion in the
yards. The gradual and, before long, probable abandonment of iron in
this class of constructions, is rapidly enabling shipbuilders to lay
themselves out for steel, and steel only. We should not omit to notice
the employment of steel plates, one-sixteenth of an inch in thickness,
for the ‘skin’ of torpedo launches, a use to which the lightness and
tenacity of such plates eminently adapt them.

The effective and systematic manner in which it is now customary in
large works to test all steel previous to its despatch, has aided in
no small degree to remove the feeling of doubt and uncertainty which
was attached to the material on its introduction. There hung around
steel an insecurity and a novelty, which, until dissipated, caused a
feeling of distrust that might have proved fatal to its extended use,
had not precautions been taken by its manufacturers to demonstrate the
consistency and reliability of the article they sought to bring into
the market. For the purpose of making these tests, a special machine is
provided, usually driven by steam. A strip from the plate to be tested
is placed in ‘jaws’ at each end; the machine is then set in motion, the
strain on the test-piece being gradually increased until its ultimate
tensile strength is reached, and it breaks—a travelling pointer
indicating the pressure exerted by the machine on the steel test-piece
at the moment of fracture. Thus the ultimate tensile strength per
square inch and also the elasticity of the plate under manipulation are
ascertained.

In order to check these and similar tests, one or more inspectors are
stationed at the manufacturers’ works by the government, the company,
or the engineer in whose designs the steel is to be employed. The
Admiralty employ a number of men to watch the tests of all the steel
destined for the royal dockyards; a similar class of inspectors perform
a like task, under Lloyd’s rules, for the private yards and the vessels
of our merchant service; whilst every engineer under whose directions
steel is being made places his assistants—their number varying with
the importance and extent of the work—to see that these tests are
faithfully carried out, that they duly fulfil the conditions he has
laid down, and to report to him the quality, quantity, and progress of
the material under their charge.

Accurate records are made of every test to which the steel has
been subjected, and the results of the behaviour of the material
are carefully noted. Hence, should any event occur to call special
attention to any particular bar, its history can be traced from the
very first to the moment it took up its position in the finished
structure for which it was destined.

So rigid and well checked a system of testing cannot fail to command
the favour of all engaged in the design of vessels, roofs, or bridges,
and to inspire the general public with confidence in and reliance
on this comparatively young member of the material world, daily
increasingly impressed into its service, and tending to promote the
general well-being and comfort of the civilised world.




THE STRAY BLOSSOM.


    Under a ruined abbey wall,
      Whose fallen stones, with moss o’ergrown,
      About the smooth fresh turf were strown,
    And piled around the roots—and tall,
      Green-ivied trunks, and branching arms
      Of beeches, sheltering from the storms,
    Within its empty, roofless hall—
      There, in a broken sill, I spied
      A little blossom, purple-eyed.

    I took it thence, and carried far
      The plant into a greenhouse, where
      I tended it, with blossoms rare,
    Until it brightened, like a star
      Delivered from a passing cloud,
      That hides it ’neath a silver shroud,
    Yet fails its loveliness to mar;
      Until it ceased to be a wild
      And common thing—and then I smiled.

    It grew, and thrived; new buds put forth,
      And more, and more, and still became
      More fruitful, till, no more the same
    Meek, lowly child of the far north,
      It reared its lordly stem on high,
      Climbing towards the distant sky,
    As though it deemed its greater worth
      Deserved a higher place, and kept
      Still reaching onwards—then I wept.

    I wept, because I thought the weed
      Showed strange ingratitude to me,
      And had forgot how lovingly
    I nourished it when in its need.
      And then the flower bent down its head,
      Touched me caressingly, and said:
    ‘Think not that I forget thy deed,
      The tender care and constant thought
      That in my life this change have wrought.

    ‘Now to the far-off skies I climb,
      Because I fain would show thee, there
      Is something higher than the care
    Of a mere plant, to fill the time
      God giveth thee. How, then, my love
      For thee more truly can I prove
    Than by thus pointing to a clime
      Where Hope’s fulfilment thou shalt find,
      And earthly love to heaven’s, bind?’

       *       *       *       *       *

    So, from a tiny seedling, grows
      Sweet Friendship’s root from year to year,
      Nourished alike by smile and tear,
    By sun and storm, and winter snows
      Of jealousy and blind mistrust;
      Through which the deathless plant shall thrust
    Its growing flower, until it blows
      At last, within that land on high
      Where virtues bloom eternally.

            F. E. S.

       *       *       *       *       *

Printed and Published by W. & R. CHAMBERS, 47 Paternoster Row, LONDON,
and 339 High Street, EDINBURGH.

       *       *       *       *       *

_All Rights Reserved._


*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHAMBERS'S JOURNAL OF POPULAR
LITERATURE, SCIENCE, AND ART, FIFTH SERIES, NO. 36, VOL. I, SEPTEMBER 6,
1884 ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
