The Project Gutenberg eBook of Observations on the Oleum Jecoris
Aselli or Cod-liver Oil, by John Savory

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Observations on the Oleum Jecoris Aselli or Cod-liver Oil
       Its nature, properties, mode of preparation, &c.

Author: John Savory

Release Date: August 30, 2021 [eBook #66185]

Language: English

Produced by: Donald Cummings and the Online Distributed Proofreading
             Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
             images generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OBSERVATIONS ON THE OLEUM
JECORIS ASELLI OR COD-LIVER OIL ***





                             OBSERVATIONS
                                  ON
                          THE COD-LIVER OIL.




                             OBSERVATIONS
                                ON THE
                         OLEUM JECORIS ASELLI,
                                  OR
                            COD-LIVER OIL;

           ITS NATURE, PROPERTIES, MODE OF PREPARATION, &c.


                                  BY
                             JOHN SAVORY,

     MEMBER OF THE SOCIETY OF APOTHECARIES, LATE PRESIDENT OF THE
        ROYAL PHARMACEUTICAL SOCIETY OF GREAT BRITAIN, &c. &c.


                                LONDON:
                 JOHN CHURCHILL, PRINCES STREET, SOHO.
                                 1849.




                                LONDON:
             G. J. PALMER, PRINTER, SAVOY-STREET, STRAND.




                                  ON
                            COD-LIVER OIL.


The introduction of a new therapeutical agent into general practice
cannot fail to interest the medical profession and the public, and,
profiting by the experience attained in a consideration of the manner
in which former remedies have been brought into notice, extolled for
their efficacy, persevered in for a time, and then gradually permitted
to fall into disuse, and finally sink into oblivion, it will doubtless
be useful to review the circumstances attendant upon the proposal now
so generally entertained of the administration of the cod-liver oil for
a variety of diseases and disorders.

Although it is only of late that the attention of the public has
been particularly drawn to this subject, principally by the zealous
endeavours of the Medical Practitioners of Germany, it will be found
upon inquiry that the remedy is by no means a novel proposal; nor are
we even indebted to our foreign _savans_ for its introduction. It is to
be traced back to the latter part of the 18th century, at which time
it was extensively used in the Manchester infirmary, and its effects,
as there exhibited, have been reported by the late Dr. Samuel Argent
Bardsley, in his “Medical Reports,” 1807, 8vo. This able physician,
who was for many years attached to the Manchester infirmary, in which
institution chronic rheumatism formed a very large proportion of the
medical cases under treatment, states, that for this afflicting malady,
the Oleum Jecoris Aselli, or cod-liver oil, enjoyed a high reputation
in Lancashire, and that thirty years previously to the time at which he
published his useful and truly practical work, it was introduced by one
of the physicians to the infirmary, and that its success was such as to
induce the celebrated Dr. Percival to recommend it to his notice and
attention as deserving of a fair and extensive trial.

Dr. Percival remarks, (Works, vol. iv. p. 355,) that it was so largely
dispensed at the Manchester infirmary, that “near a hogshead of it was
disposed of annually;” yet its employment was almost solely confined
to the relief of cases of chronic rheumatism, sciatica, and those
contractions and rigidities so frequently the consequences of exposure
to damp and cold. In these cases it was considered as superior to all
other remedial means that had been used, and its beneficial effects
were strikingly apparent. The operation of the oil in the first
instance was mostly to increase the pain sustained by the afflicted,
but this was soon succeeded by a gradual subsidence of the severity
of the symptoms. It occasioned, particularly in irritable habits, an
acceleration of the pulse, and diffused a glow of warmth over the whole
frame of a very agreeable description. It promoted the secretions
of the skin, and occasionally acted on the bowels. It was observed,
that when its use had been persisted in for a few weeks the tongue
became foul and the appetite impaired, so that an emetic was found to
be necessary. It was, however, given in large doses, varying from one
to three table-spoonfuls twice, thrice, or four times daily. It was
also employed extensively as a liniment to the stiffened joints or
limbs; but if soreness existed its use was forbidden; it was also never
exhibited internally when fever was present.

The oil employed at the Manchester Infirmary was obtained from
Newfoundland, and brought thence in barrels containing from 400 to 520
pounds in weight; it was obtained by the putrefaction of the livers
of the fish, which were heaped together for the purpose. The oil so
procured was, however, found to be exceedingly nauseous and offensive,
both as regards smell and taste, so that but few stomachs could bear
it, although a variety of means were resorted to to disguise its
unpleasant character.

Notwithstanding this, Dr. Bardsley remarks, that where it could be
persisted in, such was the power of habit, that a relish for its
flavour succeeded to its use, and what before was taken with such
extreme disgust became pleasurably received. Dr. Percival says, the
oil left upon the palate a savour like that of putrid fish, and that
the perspiration of those taking it was strongly tainted with it. The
oil, however, was not solely obtained from the livers of the cod-fish,
but also from the ling (the Gadus Molva). So offensive was it found to
be, that it was, in many instances, rendered necessary to combine it
into the form of a liquid soap, and it is not too much to assert, that
the efficiency of it as a remedy must have been, in no inconsiderable
degree, impaired by the formulæ to which it was reduced.

Mr. Darbey, the house surgeon of the infirmary, in a letter to Dr.
Percival, states the discovery of the effects of cod-liver oil to
have been accidental, and to have occurred in a patient who, using
it externally, was induced also to take some of it internally. She
recovered the use of her limbs, and in a few weeks was dismissed.
No particular attention was directed to the circumstance until her
return to the infirmary, in the course of 12 months, on account of a
renewal of her complaint with considerable violence, which, however,
soon subsided by the employment of the same means of relief. Dr. Kay,
one of the physicians of the infirmary, remarked upon the case, and
wished to test the character of the remedies in similar cases, and
found the practice to succeed beyond his most sanguine expectations.
It is worthy of remark, that the instances in which it was found to be
most serviceable were those in which the perspiration was gradually
promoted. Those who had been cripples for many years were found, after
persisting in its use for a few weeks, not only to be able to quit
their seats, to which they had been confined, but also to walk even
without the aid of crutches or a stick. The effects were so remarkable,
that application was made to the infirmary for the oil in all kinds of
lameness, and an expenditure of not less than 50 or 60 gallons annually
was the result. This practice was commenced about the year 1772, and
continued for many years afterwards.

One of the great evils attendant upon the introduction of a new
remedy is the universality of its application to cases, often of very
dissimilar nature. Its inefficiency to such a variety of purposes
thereby speedily becomes apparent, and those disorders to which it may
be beneficially applicable cease to be subjected to its operation:
the novelty is gone; a prejudice against its use is created, and some
new proposition speedily serves to banish it from a position it might
probably, with advantage, have held in the Materia Medica.

Dr. Bardsley, writing in 1807, however, gives his testimony to the
efficiency of cod-liver oil in cases of chronic rheumatism, and says,
“In some instances, where every other means have proved unsuccessful,
it has operated in a manner so decidedly beneficial as to excite
astonishment.” In many cases, however, of a mild description, it has
not been of any advantage. In the chronic rheumatism of aged persons,
in whom the muscles and their tendons have acquired great rigidity, so
that the joints have become almost inflexible, it was found to be most
serviceable. In females, also, whose powers had been much depressed
by frequent parturition, and in whom debility towards the decline of
life prevailed to a great degree, it has served to produce the happiest
effects. And, in all the cases, in which it has been attended with
benefit, it has uniformly been remarked that the consequences produced
by the exhibition of the oil have been to occasion an increase of
power, size, and general fatness. Its operation was far from being
uniform, for whilst in some instances it produced increased action
of the bowels and promoted the alvine discharges, in others it had
a tendency to induce constipation. In some it occasioned increased
perspiration, and in others an addition to the secretion of the urine.
In some it produced an eruption of the skin, attended with a sense of
prickling heat. In some few cases, none of these sensible effects were
to be observed. When it proved serviceable, its beneficial effects
were found to be apparent in the course of a fortnight, and if at the
expiration of that time no good resulted, little was to be expected
from a continuance of its use; it was, however, remarked, that when
it began to be useful its progress was observed to be gradual, and it
became necessary, in order to insure a cure of the patient and to guard
against a renewal of the attack, to continue its daily exhibition for a
period extending to not less than six or eight months.

The observations of these enlightened physicians have been confirmed
by more modern practitioners. Corroborative evidence has been adduced
against its employment in acute cases, or those attended by active
inflammatory action, and for its employment in chronic cases attended
by a low inflammatory condition, or in those cases where want of power
and diminished strength are most apparent.

It is not a little remarkable, that after the able and valued testimony
just alluded to, an agent of such therapeutical properties should have
been allowed to fall into utter neglect in this country. Much praise
is due to the physicians of Germany for investigating the subject, and
practically testing its efficiency. It would be out of place here,
and foreign to my purpose, to call attention to the various trials to
which the remedy has been submitted and its efficient powers confirmed;
these are to be found in the medical periodical literature of Germany
and France, and have been translated and transferred to the pages of
our own journals. (See “Medical Gazette,” “Lancet,” “Pharmaceutical
Journal,” “Medico-Chirurgical Review,” “British and Foreign Medical
Review,” “Continental and British Medical Review,” “London Journal of
Medicine,” &c.)

The cod-liver oil has been found principally efficacious in rheumatic,
gouty, and scrophulous cases, with their accompanying manifestations of
cutaneous eruptions and neuralgic pains. Whenever a deficiency of tone
is apparent in the system, its employment has been found of benefit.
Where, as in pulmonary cases, it cannot be looked upon as curative,
it nevertheless tends to the general support of the frame, and may
probably serve to give time for the employment of other remedies more
especially directed to the existing disease.

That cod-liver oil should produce fatness, will not occur as
remarkable to any one who looks at its composition, the principal
ingredient of which consists of carbon; this is present in all oils
to a great degree, and it therefore offers a very valuable aid in
cachectic cases, and others of diminished power and general weakness;
hence it has been remarkably efficacious in cases of mesenteric
disease: its powers also in exciting the lymphatic system to activity,
in promoting also the capillary circulation, and in effecting
absorption of scrophulous deposits, have been very striking, and
demand the attention of every practitioner. Its effect is not merely
increasing the deposition of fatty matter in the system, but, as Dr.
J. C. B. Williams has asserted, increasing the muscular strength and
action, and improving the colour of the cheeks and lips, and thereby
affording evidence of improving the nature and condition of the blood.
Dr. Copland, in his valuable Dictionary of Medicine, has given his
approbation to its employment in cases of rheumatism and sciatica,
and also in several cases of neuralgia. It would form a volume to
give, even in abstract, the cases which, within the last three years,
have been recorded of the efficacy of the cod-liver oil in a variety
of affections; and my object in at all addressing the public on this
occasion, is to point out the necessity of obtaining this remedy in its
purest and most effective form, in order to insure its operation, and
prevent it from falling into that desuetude which has characterized so
many preceding remedies proposed by the profession.

One of the greatest objections to its use was, as already stated, the
exceedingly unpleasant savour it possessed, and the consequent disgust
to its exhibition produced in persons of delicate stomach. This has in
some measure originated from the introduction of a spurious article,
or from the manner in which the original has been introduced. What
could be expected otherwise than a most loathsome material, from
livers heaped together by thousands sent over from Newfoundland, to
deposit their oil by a course of putrefaction? The livers of other
fish have also been found to have accompanied those of the cod, hence,
probably, deteriorating the effect of that of the cod, or introducing
an article calculated to produce no good result. At Berlin it is
known that a spurious oil was introduced into the hospital, and the
failure in its operation had well nigh superseded its use altogether. A
genuine oil was however happily obtained, and the value of the remedy
established. Various modes of adulteration have been detected. It has
been found to be mixed with whale oil, the oil of the seal, &c.; and
its offensive character may easily be estimated. The price at which
the oil is to be obtained may probably, in some measure, serve as a
clue to the discovery of these attempts, than which nothing can be
more reprehensible. It is melancholy to reflect that in nothing more,
or perhaps equally so, is adulteration practised than in medicinal
articles. The public have little means of detecting these fraudulent
proceedings, which ought, however, when brought to light, to be
subjected to the severest censure and punishment.

It is questionable how far these adulterations may be detected by the
operation of the oil, since the principles of its immediate action in
various diseases is far from having been satisfactorily ascertained.
Its nutrient properties are known, and must be admitted in common with
all adipose substances, and a knowledge of their constituents and
action upon the human frame; but beyond this, namely, the specific
qualities as adapted to counteract scrophula, rickets, rheumatic or
gouty inflammation, neuralgia, pulmonary disorders, &c. is unknown.
The well-ascertained effects of iodine in the relief of scrophulous
diseases point out that substance as the immediate agent affording
relief in those cases, but it has been ascertained that the quantity
of iodine in the cod-liver oil is exceedingly small, being much
beneath that which is ordinarily given in the treatment of scrophulous
disorders, and without effect in those cases; still this small quantity
may perhaps by nature be so incorporated in the composition of the
oil, that although of diminished proportions, it may yet possess an
increased power of action, as in the case of natural mineral waters.
It may probably be truly averred, that no fictitious mineral waters,
however admirably prepared, and however accurately constituted,
according to the proportions of the several ingredients as ascertained
by chemical analysis, are capable of producing the same effects as
those by the water derived from the original spring. This may perhaps
be the result of some electric or galvanic agency operating in its
constitution, the place of which cannot be supplied by any substitute
to be found in the laboratory of the chemist. Nature here manifests
her decided superiority to the efforts of art, though ably directed
by the hand of science. Dr. Pereira has suggested bromine to be the
active principle in the oil, and others have attributed its efficiency
to various phosphoric compounds. Dr. Williams refers its agency to some
biliary principle; in short, nothing certain is known upon the subject:
the cause may here be said to be occult, but the effect is apparent.
Mons. Bretonneau asserts that he has obtained effects just as markedly
beneficial to result from the use of the common whale oil, as from the
cod-liver oil, although we know the power to be but very partially
obtained from the liver of the cetaceous tribe.

As, however, cod-liver oil is admitted to be an important medical
agent, and as so many eminent medical practitioners have given
their decided approbation to its employment, it is of the greatest
consequence to have the article in the most perfect state of purity.
Under this impression I have for a considerable time been engaged
in various methods to accomplish this end, and without occasioning
any change in its constituent properties, or altering the relative
proportion of the several substances which enter into its formation,
I have at length been enabled to obtain the oil from the fresh livers
in a state of purity and comparative sapidity which I flatter myself
will be universally approved. Its clearness and transparency is equal
to that of any other oil even of a vegetable nature; its taste is
such that it needs no admixture to disguise it, and it is therefore
freed from the suspicion of being, by any combination, deprived of its
essential and curative properties. It may be taken, not in the large
doses previously administered in the Manchester Infirmary, of one, two,
or three table-spoonfuls, two, three, or four times daily, but in that
of one, two, or three tea-spoonfuls twice a day, and may, without
fear of counteracting its medicinal quality, be agreeably taken in a
small quantity of milk, or coffee, or beer. Infusion of orange-peel
is a convenient and agreeable vehicle for its administration.
Peppermint-water is also a convenient and proper means. If it be
employed in the form of an emulsion, care must be taken that no syrup
be employed into the constitution of which acid enters, as it would be
incompatible with the alkali necessarily used to form the mixture.

If the oil be pure and freed from all extraneous matters, and the
livers from which it is procured be in a recent and not in a putrid
state, there is little apprehension as to any disagreeable effects
following its exhibition; in some cases, however, it has been found to
disorder the bowels in a slight degree upon commencing its use, but
that speedily subsides, and has rarely required the aid of remedies to
counteract such effects.

Externally it may be used by itself, or in combination with ammonia, or
camphor, spermaceti, wax, &c., according to the intention with which
it is employed, and which it is hardly necessary to say should be under
the direction of a professional adviser.

  _143, New Bond Street,
      Feb. 21, 1849._


                                LONDON:
             G. J. PALMER, PRINTER, SAVOY STREET, STRAND.




                         _By the same Author._


                  Third Edition, 12mo., cloth, 5_s._

A COMPENDIUM of DOMESTIC MEDICINE, and COMPANION to the MEDICINE CHEST.
Comprising Plain Directions for the Employment of Medicines――their
Properties and Doses――Brief Descriptions of the Symptoms and Treatment
of Diseases――Disorders incidental to Infants and Children――Directions
for restoring Suspended Animation――Counteracting the Effects of
Poison――A Selection of the most Efficacious Prescriptions and various
Mechanical Auxiliaries to Medicine.

By JOHN SAVORY, Member of the Society of Apothecaries, and late
President of the Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain.


“This is decidedly the completest work of its kind that has fallen
under our notice.”――_Mirror._

“This very useful little manual is entirely divested of scientific
phraseology, and may be safely consulted, in cases of emergency,
by persons residing at a distance from their medical adviser, more
particularly where delay may be productive of fatal results.”――_Analyst._

“A work which merits the attention of our parochial clergy, who
are often called upon to act the part of the good Samaritan. In
cases of trying emergency, when medical assistance is not at hand,
it will be found a safe guide, the symptoms of diseases being
clearly defined, and their appropriate remedies plainly pointed
out.”――_Essex Standard._


       *       *       *       *       *


 Transcriber’s Notes:

 ――Text in italics is enclosed by underscores (_italics_).

 ――Obvious punctuation and spelling inaccuracies were silently corrected.

 ――Archaic and variable spelling has been preserved.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OBSERVATIONS ON THE OLEUM
JECORIS ASELLI OR COD-LIVER OIL ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
